---
title: Dynamical spin structure factor
date: 2024-07-02
auhtor: Axel Saenz
tags: ["Formulas"]
---

***Tags:*** {%for tag in page.tags %} *{{tag}}*{% if forloop.last != true %},{% endif %}{% endfor %}

# Intro

We consider the XXZ ring of length $$L$$ with $$N$$ up-spin particles. 
Let's compute the *dynamical spin structure factor (DSSF)*.
We follow the formulas and notation from [this paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0603681).
The *DSSF* is given by the following formula

$$
S^{zz}(q, \omega) = \frac{1}{L} \sum_{j, j' =1}^N e^{- i q (j-j')} \int_{- \infty}^{\infty}dt e^{i \omega t} \langle S_j^z(t) S_{j'}^z(0) \rangle
$$

where $$L$$ is the length of the ring.

## Integrand

First, we need compute the integrand from the previous formula.
We have

The *z-spin operators* $$S_j^{z}$$ is a local oprator acting on the $$j^{th}$$ spin of the ring.
The z-spin operator is given by the following matrix

$$
\left(\begin{array}{cc} 1/2 & 0 \\ 0 & -1/2\end{array} \right)
$$

on the up-down basis, $$\mid \uparrow \rangle ,  \mid \downarrow \rangle $$.
Namely, the z-spin operator returns $$+1/2$$ for an up-spin and $$-1/2$$ for a down-spin.
The, we have

$$
S_j^z(t) = e^{i t H /\hbar } S_j^z e^{-i t H /\hbar }
$$

where $$H$$ is the Hamiltonian of the spin chain.

***Warning:*** This my intepretation of the operator in the integrand, which may be wrong. One should double check that this is what the authors of the paper had in mind.

## Action on the wave function

Recall the formual for the wave function

$$
\begin{align}
\mid \Psi(t) \rangle &= e^{-i t H /\hbar } \mid \Psi(0) \rangle\\
&=\sum_{x \in X} \left(\sum_{[\xi] \in \Xi} \ell(y, \xi) u(\xi, x) e^{-i t E(\xi)} \right) \mid x \rangle
\end{align}
$$

with $$x = (x_1, x_2, \dots, x_N)$$ is the configuration of the up-spins on the ring. We have the following action of the z-spin operator

$$
S_j^z : \mid x \rangle \mapsto \begin{cases}\tfrac{1}{2} \mid x\rangle &\quad j \in x \\ - \tfrac{1}{2} \mid x \rangle. &\quad j \notin x  \end{cases}.
$$

Let us partition the configuration space by the configurations that include an up-spin at position $$j$$ and those that don't. Set

$$
X(j) = \{ x \in X \mid j \in x \}.
$$

Then, 

$$
\begin{align}
&\left(\langle \Psi(0) \mid e^{i t H/\hbar} S_j^z\right)^{\dagger} =  S_j^z e^{-i t H/\hbar} \mid \Psi(0) \rangle\\
&= \frac{1}{2} \left( \sum_{x \in X(j)} \left(\sum_{[\xi] \in \Xi} \ell(y, \xi) u(\xi, x) e^{-i t E(\xi)} \right) \mid x \rangle - \sum_{x \in X(j)^{c}} \left(\sum_{[\xi] \in \Xi} \ell(y, \xi) u(\xi, x) e^{-i t E(\xi)} \right) \mid x \rangle\right)\\
\end{align}
$$

Also, we have 

$$
\begin{align}
S_{j'}^z |\Psi(0)\rangle  = S_{j'}^z |y\rangle = \begin{cases} \frac{1}{2} \mid y \rangle, &\quad j' \in y  \\ -\frac{1}{2} \mid y \rangle, &\quad j' \notin y \end{cases}
\end{align}
$$

so that 


$$
\begin{align}
& e^{-i t H/\hbar} S_{j'}^z \mid \Psi(0) \rangle\\
&= \frac{(-1)^{j' \notin y}}{2} \left( \sum_{x \in X(j')} \left(\sum_{[\xi] \in \Xi} \ell(y, \xi) u(\xi, x) e^{-i t E(\xi)} \right) \mid x \rangle - \sum_{x \in X(j')^{c}} \left(\sum_{[\xi] \in \Xi} \ell(y, \xi) u(\xi, x) e^{-i t E(\xi)} \right) \mid x \rangle\right).
\end{align}
$$

where $$(-1)^{j' \notin y} = -1$$ when $$ j' \notin y $$ and $$(-1)^{j' \notin y} = 1$$ when $$ j' \in y $$. 


## Expected value

We have

$$
\begin{align}
& \langle S_j^z(t) S_{j'}^z \rangle = \langle \Psi \mid e^{i t H /\hbar } S_j^z e^{-i t H /\hbar } S_{j'}^z \mid \Psi \rangle\\
&= \frac{(-1)^{j' \notin y}}{4} \BIG( \sum_{x \in X(j) \cap X(j')} \sum_{[\zeta], [\xi] \in \Xi} \overline{\ell(y, \zeta) u(\zeta, x) } \ell(y, \xi) u(\xi, x) e^{-i t (E(\xi)- E(\zeta) )}\\
+ \sum_{x \in X(j)^c \cap X(j')^c} \sum_{[\zeta], [\xi] \in \Xi} \overline{\ell(y, \zeta) u(\zeta, x) } \ell(y, \xi) u(\xi, x) e^{-i t (E(\xi)- E(\zeta) )}\\
- \sum_{x \in X(j) \cap X(j')^c} \sum_{[\zeta], [\xi] \in \Xi} \overline{\ell(y, \zeta) u(\zeta, x) } \ell(y, \xi) u(\xi, x) e^{-i t (E(\xi)- E(\zeta) )}\\
- \sum_{x \in X(j) \cap X(j')^c} \sum_{[\zeta], [\xi] \in \Xi} \overline{\ell(y, \zeta) u(\zeta, x) } \ell(y, \xi) u(\xi, x) e^{-i t (E(\xi)- E(\zeta) )}  \BIG)
\end{align}
$$

### Next Steps

- Compute the $$N=1$$ case.



{% include utterances.html %}
